---
author: justine
date: 2014-01-02T12:46:00-5000
lang: en
layout: post
title: An Open Letter to Mister Justin Wedes
---

Dear Mr. Wedes---Do you remember how you said at my apartment the other day
that the users of Facebook are the ones who create all the value?

This is a very problematic argument to make because it dismisses the labour of
software engineers such as myself. Tread carefully if you go there, because
you'll be treading on my pride as a worker.

In the 19^th century when the socialists said that workers created all the
value, they were right. Let's say you've got a factory that makes doorknobs. It
takes a fixed amount of material resources and human labour to create each
doorknob. Once the shareholders fund the creation of the business buying the
initial supplies and an engineer/inventor for a design, the workers do
everything else. Workers make the actual doorknob from beginning to end. The
shareholders hold the whip to extract surplus value forevermore. Then each
doorknob gets sold and a family uses it for maybe 50-100 years.

In the "new economy", things are different! The same 19^th century logic no
longer applies. Today you'll have a couple software engineers who require no
startup capital other than what's needed to pay their rent and ramen. They
invent, design, and produce all in one fell swoop. Then they have a product
that can be used by the whole of humanity forevermore. The software engineers
don't technically have to do anything once the software is built. The fixed
labour then only depends on system administrators to run the service. So
they're probably most closely analogous to the "workers" of the 19^th century
when you look at the new economy. (But even system administrators are starting
to go away now thanks to the automation benefits of cloud hosting platforms
like App Engine and Google Apps.) So the product is built once, and everyday
people just use it. People keep using it over and over again. That's it. Just
like the doorknob.

So if you say that the "users of facebook" create all the value in this
21<sup>st</sup> century economy... that's sort of like saying that people who
lived in houses created doorknobs in the 19<sup>th</sup> century. It just
doesn't make any sense.

Part of the social contract for using Facebook is that they reserve the right
to put ads on the righthand side in order to pay for the system administrator
salaries and buy hardware to keep the service running. But they've raised so
much capital and expropriated so much ad money, that they kept the software
engineers on as full-time workers who continually improve the software and
automate more and more. They became so good at it that they ended up getting
filthy rich. Why? Because they're creating products that are awesome and people
want to use them.

It's a nonviolent revolution. Facebook didn't come into our communities with
guns telling us that we have to work for them all day. It's much more like
Aldous Huxley's Brave New World in the sense that they created a product we
genuinely crave and want to use. Something that makes life better.

So if Facebook is making your life better, why would you care if some geeks on
the other side of the country are making a lot of money as a result? Why is it
wrong that they have a bunch of dollars? They never hurt anyone. They just give
away a cool product for free and somehow figured out a way to get rich doing
it.

So I beseech you to reconsider your plans to demand a cut of that money. I
think you've mistakenly used old theory in a new age where it no longer applies
in a rational manner. I'm telling you as a friend, as a communist, and as a
software engineer that if you demand Facebook give free money to all its
users—you will absolutely *infuriate* tech workers. Like this is even worse
than what right-wingers would call "entitled whining", this is downright
*avaricious*.

![Photograph of Justin Wedes](//i.imgur.com/38fCWCe.jpg)

Now I understand that many people argue that content creators ought to be
entitled to compensation or royalties when sharing their content on
Facebook. That argument may *seem* reasonable. After all, Google gives us a cut
of the ads on our YouTube videos. Everyone wants to be like Psy, who I'm sure
got quite wealthy off his Gangnam Style hit video.

But this logic doesn't apply to Facebook, which is a community. It's not a tv
channel like YouTube. Most content is just links to other websites.

For example, if I were to post a link to The Huffington Post and it goes viral,
tens of thousands of Facebook users will visit The Huffington Post's website
and see ads. The ad provider would then give money to The Huffington Post in
exchange for your eyeballs. THEREFORE I believe it could be reasonably
argued—within the context of a liberal capitalist framework—that The Huffington
Post ought to be paying royalties to Facebook!  Also why isn't The Huffington
Post paying royalties to us? Liberals just sit around and share links to that
site all day. Don't they deserve a cut too?

It's also important to take note of the fact that unlike YouTube, there is no
clear way to correlate Facebook's ad revenue to the content submitted by
individual users. When browsing Facebook at any given moment, there'll be like
fifty pieces of content from fifty different individuals. It's a giant collage
of STUFF. Ads *just happen* to appear on the side.

So it would be nearly impossible to pay Facebook users based on the quality of
the content they produce. for example, you couldn't say, "oh Rebecca's status
update about her boyfriend caused a bunch of people to click on an ad from
modcloth and buy $2000 worth of merchandise, so we're going to give Rebecca a
cheque for $50 as her share of the sales. You absolutely cannot do that.

So the option is to give Facebook users money based on how much time they spend
on the site. Chances are it'll be like a few cents an hour. But that's beneath
minimum wage so using Facebook would become illegal and you lose.

So the only remaining option is to pay out dividends to every single American.
That cheque will probably amount to $15/year or some hilariously small amount.
This is basic economics. When a pie gets divided between three hundred
*million* people, each piece is going to turn out rather small. Everyone gets
enough money to buy a subscription to The Economist.

Except now—since you've decided to only pay dividends to Americans—you've
implemented a nationalistic policy which marginalizes the other seven billion
humans and you lose again. Kids in Africa use Facebook too! It's an
international product.

So what do we get when we divide the yearly profits eight billion times? No
more Facebook, because the logistics alone of distributing that many pennies
would bankrupt the company.

Giving people free money is quite problematic; because it'll just be a handout
to the private sector. Let's say you wanted to end poverty in Brooklyn, so you
handed a cheque for $10,000 to every man and woman so they could buy rent and
food for the next 12 months. I guarantee you that for 90% of those people, that
money is going straight into the pockets of the check cashers, bars, clubs,
drug dealers, and casinos.

Now IF YOU'RE LUCKY and people use the money for what they *should*, then it
goes in the pockets of the slumlords and fast food restaurants.

So you see, handing out free money doesn't actually solve any problems! You
need to get yourself out of the liberal mindset.  Engineering the economy is an
indirect approach to change and it doesn't always work very well. Why solve a
problem by guiding the slippery invisible hand, when we can just solve the
problem?

So rather than demanding money, my personal recommendation (as I said when we
met earlier) is to promote a happy positive message where you beseech the tech
industry to provide the material necessities of human survival. Extra points if
you gently poke fun at their internal contradiction, which is that they just
want more blood for the blood god. (By 'blood' I mean ‘knowledge’; and by ‘god’
I allude to the burgeoning superintelligence.)

That's what we actually needed all along! We need *digified* housing,
cafeterias to serve food, bicycles to get around, and medicine to keep us
healthy. That's it.

Our current capitalist system *fails so hard* at providing these simple
things. And it's so funny watching liberals try to solve it. For the past fifty
years, neoliberals and the New Left have been playing hocus pocus with the
markets. MEANWHILE: Our infrastructure has crumbled and the finance industry
now owns all the land. We don't let people go to the doctor when they get
cancer! And if you try to sleep in a park, the cops will beat the shit out of
you. I know these things for a FACT, because they both happened to me.

But the U.S. Regime isn't *just* incompitent—they can't even keep themselves
running! The recent government shutdown truly illuminated the fact that this
tyrannical regime is *clearly* in its death throes. I say let it die!

So rather than continuing to take the social democracy approach of propping up
the current shitty system, let's start setting higher standards. Rather than
helping people make their unbelievably insanely expensive rents for their
blighted dilapidated crumb factories, how about we build the best fucking
housing imaginable with modern engineering? How about we strive for
greatness. Do something that's actually exciting and makes life beautiful.

It'll be cheaper too. Like I honestly believe with modern technology, we can
provide the basic necessities of human survival to each and every individual
who will choose to accept them. That's much better than the current system
which is basically: become a wage slave married to corporation (if you're
lucky), wear a suit &amp; tie, and work all day—*or die!*

I think together we can appeal to the tech industry's better nature and
convince them to provide for material needs. rather than handing out free
money, I think they'll respond if we ask them to end human suffering. I think
the tech industry engineers are the greatest problem solvers in human
history. I think that if we let them, they'd be able to design and build new
cities from the ground up—from scratch—that are highly efficient,
breathtakingly beautiful, and sustainable.

To be honest, I don't think the tech industry will have a choice! It's likely
that they'll automate probably 90% of the workforce in the next 20 years. So if
no one has jobs, no one will be able to sit around and hangout on Facebook all
day. I hope my point is becoming clearer now.

This is the ultimate and most tragic contradiction of the tech industry. It's
making all the people it depends on to generate knowledge for the knowledge
graph—it's making them obsolete. When workers become obsolete, capitalism sends
them "out to pasture". So the only solution to this contradiction is to
overthrow capitalism. Otherwise this ancient and barbaric system of economics
will kill us all.

I partially blame the foolish keynesian economists, who seem to think the best
way to run an economy is by forcing everyone to be a busy little worker bee so
they can have lots of money to buy lots of things. It's an incredibly naïve
point of view since the necessity of work is becoming obsolete. The entire
strategy liberal economists use to incentivize labour is *killing* our society.

This system is tyrannical and oppressive. It grants us no security and forces
us to constantly struggle to sell ourselves survive. It forces every single man
woman and child to be an expert in finance and law... just to live life as they
please! The longer we make money a prerequisite for basic human survival, the
longer we will struggle and be exploited.

I'm not even anti-money. I just want to see the cruelty end. I don't care if
some people are a little richer and have luxury goods, so long as the material
necessities for everyone else are being met without the constant fear of losing
everything. If we can just take care of the bare minimum things you need to
live a prosperous life without having to participate in markets, then as far as
I'm concerned, people who *are* actually interested in money can go
wild. Because then it's all just luxury and fun.

You see, the way you use money *properly* is sort of like how I fuck around
with the Bitcoin market. I trade bitcoins on Mt.Gox regularly as a high-latency
market maker. My net worth shifts by tens of thousands of dollars each day. But
I'm rich so it's all fun money to me. I'm not emotionally invested. I know if I
lose my fun money, I'm still going to have a roof over my head. That's what
allows me to be rational and earn more pretend money. But if I were poor,
under-educated, and struggling... there would be no way I'd be able to trade on
Mt.Gox rationally! I'd panic, lose my cool, and get owned by the spread.

That's why I hate capitalism. Because I understand *just enough* about finance
to realize that it's all just a game for people who are interested in
finance. That's it.

Most people aren't interested in finance. Some people like art. Some people
like computers. Some people like basket weaving. Whatever! They should be able
to live freely. They should be able to *do as they please* without having to
become a capitalist. But this tyrannical system would rather see them starve,
just for being themselves.

Capitalism = conformity. It's the enemy of diversity and the bane of freedom.
